“Oft' him who's solitary know mercy, 
The Creator's compassion, though sad-hearted through the sea-ways, 
He must row by hand the ice-cold seas,
Treading the path of exile.  Fortune is firm
So spoke the wanderer, mindful of hardships,
Terrible slaughter, and the death of kinsmen
“Oft' alone I must at dawn
Lament my sorrows.  There is no one now alive
To whom I dare my spirit
To declare aloud, I truly know
That it is an eorl's noble habit
To keep his soul's stronghold firmly bound,
Guarding his inner-chamber, think as he may.
No weary-heart can withstand fortune,
Nor the trouble mind provide help;
Therefore those eager for glory their sorrow oft'
Bury deep in their breast;
So I had to do in my on soul,
Oft' in wretched sorrow, separated from homeland,
Far from noble kinsmen, in fetters bound
Long ago my gold-friend
Was hid in earth's darkness, and I wretched thence
Traveled winter-worn over the freezing waves,
Seeking the sad hall's give of treature,
Whether far or near I might find
A man in the mead-hall who knew my kin,
Or who might comfort me in my friendlessness,
Entertaining me with pleasure.  He who has experienced it knows
How cruel a companion is sorrow
To him who has few close confidants.
He holds the path of exile, not the wound gold, 
Frozen inside, nor earth's glories
He recalls retainers and receiving of treasure,
How in youth his gold-friend
Was accustomed to feats.  All pleasure perished.
Therefore he who knows this must his friends' and lord's
Loved lore-speeches for a long time lack.
Then in simultaneous sorrow and sleep
Is often set the sad solitary thinker,
In his mind he seems to imagine his lord
That he might embrace and kiss him and on his knee
Hand and head, as he did before
Enjoying the throne's gifts in days gone by.
Then he awakes again a friendless man, 
Seeing dark waves in front of him,
Bathing seabirds, spreading their winds,
Frost falls and snow, mixed with hail.
Then are the heart wounds heavier,
Acing for loved ones.  Sorrow is renewed
Then the mind recalls kinsmen's memory;
Meets with melodies, eagerly examines
men of the hall. Swims away again
Sailing spirits no longer bring
Their familiar songs.  Care is renewed
For him who is very frequently sent 
Over freezing waves while weary in soul. 
Therefore I do not think I am able to go through this world
Without my heart growing dark,
When I fully ponder eorlas' lives,
How they suddenly left the hall,
Bold noble-kinsmen.  So in this middle-earth
Every day fails and falls.
For this reason one cannot become a wise man, unless he has 
His share of winters in this worldly realm.  The wise man should be patient;
He must not be too hot-hearted, nor to hasty to speak
Neither too weak a warrior, nor to rash
Neither too timid, Nor too greedy
Nor eager to boast, before he know how things will turn out.
A beorn must wait before he speaks a boast
Until his stout-heart fully knows
Which way it will turn [In battle].
The spiritually wise man must understand
That all this world's wealth remains ruined,
So now here and there midst this middle earth
The wind blows upon standing walls,
Frost falls upon snow-swept dwellings, [Ederas].
Wine-halls decay, rulers lie
Robbed of mirth, might hosts lie
Splendid by the wall.  War took away some,
Delivering unto death: One a bird bore away
Over the deep sea, one a gray wolf
Shared with death, One sad-faced
Eorl lies hid in an earthen cave.
The Creator laid waste to this earth
Until the town-dwellers fell silent
And the ancient works of giants stood empty.”
He wisely thought on this foundation
And deeply ponders this dark life,
Wise in mind, he often recalls the past
Slaughter of multitudes, and speaks these words:
“Where went the horse?  Where went the rider?  Where went the giver of treasure?
Where went the seats of feasting? Where is the hall's mirth?
Alas bright cup! Alas mail-clad warrior?
Alas king's splendor? How the time fled,
Turing to twilight under the cover of night, as if it were naught.”
Now he stands on a the way of beloved retainers
A wall wondrously hight, adorned with woven-worms.
“Eorlas taken away by a multitude of spears
Weapons seeking slaughter, glourious fortune,
And storms bent against the stone slopes
Falling frost freezes the earth,
The tumult of winter, then darkness descends,
Deepening the shadow of night, from the north comes
A fury of fierce hail on warriors.
All is full of hardship in the kingdom of earth;
The work out of fortune changes the world under heaven.
Here wealth is fleeting, Here friend is fleeting,
Here man is fleeting, here kinsman is fleeting,
All the earth's foundation becomes vanity.”
So spoke the wise in mind, sitting by himself in counsel.
Blessed is he who keeps his faith; Never his suffering to quickly should
A beorn reveal from his breast, before he knows how to remedy it
The courageous eorl provide.  Well is him who seeks mercy for himself
Consolation from the Father in heaven, where all our security stands.
